docs/nodes-grouping (#4519)
kedro-org/kedro: docs/source/deployment/nodes_grouping.md

# Node Grouping in Kedro: Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces

When deploying a Kedro project, grouping nodes effectively is crucial for maintainability, debugging, and execution control. This document provides an overview of three key grouping methods: Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces, along with a list of their strengths, limitations, best use cases, and links to how to use them.

# Choosing between pipelines, tags, and namespaces in Kedro

> ## Grouping by pipelines
> 
> ### What works with Kedro
> - If your project contains different pipelines, you can use them as predefined node groupings for deployment.
> - Pipelines can be executed separately in the deployment environment.
> - With the visualisation in Kedro Viz, you can switch to see different pipeline in a more isolated view
> <br>
> ![Switching between different pipelines in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_switching_pipeline.gif)
> 
> ### What doesn't work with Kedro
> - If you want to group nodes differently from the current pipeline structure, instead of creating a new pipeline, you can use tags or namespaces to achieve that.
> - You cannot execute more than one pipeline in a single step because the `kedro run --pipeline` command allows running only one pipeline at a time.
> - You can switch between different pipelines in Kedro Viz, but the flowchart view does not support collapsing or expanding pipelines.
> 
> ### Best used when
> - You have already separated your logic into different pipelines, and your project is structured to execute them independently in the deployment environment
> 
> ### Not to use when
> - You need to run more than one pipeline together.
> - You want to use the expand and collapse functionality in Kedro Viz
> 
> ### How to use
> - Run using:
>   ```bash
>   kedro run --pipeline=<your_pipeline_name>
>   ```
> - More information: [Run a pipeline by name](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/run_a_pipeline.html#run-a-pipeline-by-name)

Reviewer: What about turning the `### what works`, `### what doesn't work`, and `### how to use` into prose, and leaving the `### best used when` and `### not to use when`?

Something like this:

````suggestion
## Grouping by pipelines

If your project contains different pipelines, you can use them as predefined node groupings for deployment as follows:

```bash
kedro run --pipeline=<your_pipeline_name>
```

Pipelines can be executed separately in the deployment environment.

With the visualisation in Kedro Viz, you can switch to see different pipeline in a more isolated view:

![Switching between different pipelines in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_switching_pipeline.gif)

You can read more about [how to run a pipeline by name](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/run_a_pipeline.html#run-a-pipeline-by-name).

On the other hand, if you want to group nodes differently from the current pipeline structure, instead of creating a new pipeline, you can use tags or namespaces to achieve that. You cannot execute more than one pipeline in a single step because the `kedro run --pipeline` command allows running only one pipeline at a time.

You can switch between different pipelines in Kedro Viz, but the flowchart view does not support collapsing or expanding pipelines.

### Best used when
- You have already separated your logic into different pipelines, and your project is structured to execute them independently in the deployment environment

### Not to use when
- You need to run more than one pipeline together.
- You want to use the expand and collapse functionality in Kedro Viz
````

Author: yeah that looks good to me too, let me me update that

# Node Grouping in Kedro: Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces

When deploying a Kedro project, grouping nodes effectively is crucial for maintainability, debugging, and execution control. This document provides an overview of three key grouping methods: Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces, along with a list of their strengths, limitations, best use cases, and links to how to use them.

# Choosing between pipelines, tags, and namespaces in Kedro

> ## Nodes grouping using pipelines in Kedro

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Grouping by pipelines
```

### What works with Kedro
- If your project contains different pipelines, you can use them as predefined node groupings for deployment.
- Pipelines can be executed separately in the deployment environment.
- With the visualisation in Kedro Viz, you can switch to see different pipeline in a more isolated view
<br>
![Switching between different pipelines in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_switching_pipeline.gif)

### What doesn't work with Kedro

> - If you need to create custom node groupings that are different with your existing pipelines, creating new pipelines for them may not be convenient. Instead, you can use alternative grouping methods such as tags or namespaces.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand this sentence 🤔

Author: i think what I'm trying to say is "if you want to group nodes to something different than the current pipeline structure, instead of creating a new pipeline, using tags or namespace can help you with that"

Author: I'll make it clearer

Reviewer: Okay, now I understand! However, it's not really a disadvantage right? It's just that users have an alternative in this case.

> - You cannot execute more than one pipeline in a single step because the kedro run --pipeline command allows running one pipeline at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You cannot execute more than one pipeline in a single step because the `kedro run --pipeline` command allows running only one pipeline at a time.
```

👍🏼

> - You can switch between different pipelines in Kedro Viz, but the visualisation does not support collapsing or expanding pipelines within Kedro Viz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can switch between different pipelines in Kedro Viz, but the flowchart view does not support collapsing or expanding pipelines.
```

?

### Best used when

> - Your project is structured in a way that requires executing pipelines separately in the deployment environment.

Reviewer: Maybe something like "you have already separated your logic into different pipelines"? Although it feels a bit tautological... not sure what the best phrasing would be here

### Not to use when
- You need to run more than one pipeline together.

> - You want to use the expand or collapse functionality in Kedro Viz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You want to use the expand and collapse functionality in Kedro Viz
```

### How to use
- Run using:
  ```bash
  kedro run --pipeline=<your_pipeline_name>
  ```
- More information: [Run a pipeline by name](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/run_a_pipeline.html#run-a-pipeline-by-name)

---

> ## Tags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Grouping by tags
```

### What works with Kedro
- You can tag individual nodes or the entire pipeline, allowing flexible execution of specific sections without modifying the pipeline structure.
- Kedro-Viz provides a clear visualisation of tagged nodes, making it easier to understand.
<br>
![Filters Panel in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_filters_tags.png)

### What doesn't work with Kedro
- Nodes with the same tag can exist in different pipelines, making debugging and maintaining the codebase more challenging.

> - Executing more than one tag in a single step isn't always possible, and sometimes it will fail to run if a part of pipeline is not populated before at the time of execution.

Reviewer: Isn't this part of every method though? For example, if I run `kedro run --pipeline data_science` before `data_processing`, it will fail, would it not?

Author: yeah i think it happens on tags too, so maybe not worth mentioning it at all

Author: maybe i can include as same for pipeline and namespace, you can only run 1 at the time

### Best used when
- You need to run specific nodes that don’t belong to the same pipeline.
- You want to rerun a subset of nodes in a large pipeline.

### Not to use when
- The tagged nodes have strong dependencies, which might cause execution failures.
- Tags are not hierarchical, so tracking groups of nodes can become difficult.

> - Tags do not enforce structure like pipelines or namespaces.

Reviewer: These two are they key ones I think 💯

### How to use
- Run using:
  ```bash
  kedro run --tags=<your_tag_name>
  ```
- More information: [How to tag a node](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/nodes.html#how-to-tag-a-node)

---

> ## Namespaces

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Grouping by namespaces
```

### What works with Kedro
- Namespaces allow you to group nodes, ensuring clear dependencies and separation within a pipeline while maintaining a consistent structure.
- As the same as pipelines or tags, you can enable selective execution using namespaces.

> - Namespaces improve visualisation in Kedro-Viz.

Reviewer: Maybe "Kedro Viz supports expand and collapsing namespaces as nested pipelines" or sth like that?

<br>
![Switching expanding namespaced pipeline in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_expanding_namespace.gif)

### What doesn't work with Kedro
- You cannot run more than one namespace simultaneously—Kedro allows executing one namespace at a time.
- **Defining namespace at Node-level:** If you define namespaces at the node level, they behave similarly to tags and do not guarantee execution consistency.

> - **Defining namespace at Pipeline-level:** When applying a namespace at the pipeline level, Kedro automatically renames all inputs, outputs, and parameters within that pipeline. This can introduce naming conflicts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Defining namespace at Pipeline-level:** When applying a namespace at the pipeline level, Kedro automatically renames all inputs, outputs, and parameters within that pipeline. You will need to update your catalog accordingly.
```

? (IIUC, namespaces are supposed to _avoid_ naming conflicts)

### Best used when

> - You want to organise nodes logically within a pipeline while keeping a structured execution flow.

Reviewer: Maybe we could mention that namespaces allow _nesting_?

# Node Grouping in Kedro: Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces

> When deploying a **Kedro** project, grouping nodes effectively is crucial for **maintainability, debugging, and execution control**. This document provides an overview of three key grouping methods: **Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces**, along with a comparison of their strengths, limitations, best use cases, and links to how to use them.

Reviewer 2: Nit: we don't usually add bold/italics like this.

Author: oopps, i've removed all of that styling nnow

> When deploying a **Kedro** project, grouping nodes effectively is crucial for **maintainability, debugging, and execution control**. This document provides an overview of three key grouping methods: **Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces**, along with a comparison of their strengths, limitations, best use cases, and links to how to use them.

Reviewer 2: Can we explain _why_ grouping nodes is crucial for all these things? It's a pretty strong statement but without further elaboration I don't think it will help users.

Author: perhaps something like this? 

> When deploying a Kedro project, grouping nodes effectively makes pipelines easier to manage and update, helps them run faster by using resources efficiently, and allows them to handle more data as they grow across different deployment environments. To learn more about the best ways to group nodes using Pipelines, Tags, and Namespaces, follow our detailed guide:

## **Choosing the Right Grouping Method**

If you're unsure which method to use, consider these questions:

- **Do you need ...** → Use **Pipelines**
- **Do you need ...** → Use **Tags**
- **Do you need ...** → Use **Namespaces**

> By choosing the right method, you can optimize your Kedro project for **scalability, readability, and efficient deployment.** 🚀

Reviewer 2: This has too much of a marketing vibe to it. If we make statements like this in the docs the least we can do is explain them.

Author: ah yeah , agree I went a bit too much on the "sale" haha. Have removed this section completely now 👍

# Nodes grouping in Kedro: pipelines, tags, and namespaces

Effectively grouping nodes in deployment is crucial for maintainability, debugging, and execution control. This document provides an overview of three key grouping methods: pipelines, tags, and namespaces, along with their strengths, limitations, best uses, and relevant documentation links.

## Grouping by pipelines

> If your project contains different pipelines, you can use them as predefined node groupings for deployment. Pipelines can be executed separately in the deployment environment. With the visualisation in Kedro Viz, you can switch to see different pipeline in a more isolated view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your project contains different pipelines, you can use them as predefined node groupings for deployment. Pipelines can be executed separately in the deployment environment. With the visualisation in Kedro Viz, you can switch to see different pipelines in an isolated view.
```

<br>
![Switching between different pipelines in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_switching_pipeline.gif)

If you want to group nodes differently from the existing pipeline structure, you can use tags or namespaces instead of creating a new pipeline. The `kedro run --pipeline` command allows running one pipeline at a time, so multiple pipelines cannot be executed in a single step. While you can switch between pipelines in Kedro Viz, the flowchart view does not support collapsing or expanding them.

**Best used when**

> - You have already separated your logic into different pipelines, and your project is structured to execute them independently in the deployment environment

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You have already separated your logic into different pipelines, and your project is structured to execute them independently in the deployment environment.
```

**Not to use when**

> - You need to run more than one pipeline together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- You need to run more than one pipeline at a time.
```

> - You want to use the expand and collapse functionality in Kedro Viz

Reviewer 2: Just adding `.` consistently for every bullet point item.

```suggestion
- You want to use the expand and collapse functionality in Kedro Viz.
```

**How to use**

  ```bash
  kedro run --pipeline=<your_pipeline_name>
  ```
More information: [Run a pipeline by name](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/run_a_pipeline.html#run-a-pipeline-by-name)

---

## Grouping by tags

> You can tag individual nodes or the entire pipeline, allowing flexible execution of specific sections without modifying the pipeline structure.Kedro-Viz provides a clear visualisation of tagged nodes, making it easier to understand.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can tag individual nodes or the entire pipeline, allowing flexible execution of specific sections without modifying the pipeline structure. Kedro-Viz provides a clear visualisation of tagged nodes, making it easier to understand.
```

<br>
![Filters Panel in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_filters_tags.png)

Please note that nodes with the same tag can exist in different pipelines, making debugging and maintaining the codebase more challenging.

**Best used when**
- You need to run specific nodes that don’t belong to the same pipeline.
- You want to rerun a subset of nodes in a large pipeline.

**Not to use when**
- The tagged nodes have strong dependencies, which might cause execution failures.
- Tags are not hierarchical, so tracking groups of nodes can become difficult.

> - Tags do not enforce structure like pipelines or namespaces.

Reviewer 2: I think this last point isn't so much a `Not to use when` but more a note on tags. Maybe it makes sense to mention this before the best used when/not to use when sections.

Author: DONE 👍

**How to use**

  ```bash
  kedro run --tags=<your_tag_name>
  ```
More information: [How to tag a node](https://docs.kedro.org/en/stable/nodes_and_pipelines/nodes.html#how-to-tag-a-node)

---

## Grouping by namespaces

> Namespaces allow you to group nodes, ensuring clear dependencies and separation within a pipeline while maintaining a consistent structure. As the same as pipelines or tags, you can enable selective execution using namespaces, and you cannot run more than one namespace simultaneously—Kedro allows executing one namespace at a time. Kedro Viz allows expanding and collapsing namespace pipelines in the visualisation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Namespaces allow you to group nodes, ensuring clear dependencies and separation within a pipeline while maintaining a consistent structure. Like with pipelines or tags, you can enable selective execution using namespaces, and you cannot run more than one namespace simultaneously—Kedro allows executing one namespace at a time. Kedro Viz allows expanding and collapsing namespace pipelines in the visualisation.
```

<br>
![Switching expanding namespaced pipeline in Kedro Viz](../meta/images/kedro_viz_expanding_namespace.gif)

Using namespaces comes with a few challenges:
- **Defining namespace at Node-level:** If you define namespaces at the node level, they behave similarly to tags and do not guarantee execution consistency.
- **Defining namespace at Pipeline-level:** When applying a namespace at the pipeline level, Kedro automatically renames all inputs, outputs, and parameters within that pipeline. You will need to update your catalog accordingly.

**Best used when**
- You want to organise nodes logically within a pipeline while keeping a structured execution flow. You can also nest namespace pipelines within each other.
- Your pipeline structure is well-defined, and using namespaces improves visualisation in Kedro-Viz.
- Customising deployment groups by adding namespaces at the node level.

> **Not to use when**

Reviewer 2: I feel like in this section these are more phrased like "downsides" of namespaces rather than `Not to use when` points. Maybe we can say something like: not to use when namespaces overcomplicate an otherwise simple pipeline structure or not to use when editing the catalog is not wanted. Maybe a bit more elaborate, but in any case I think the point we need to bring across here is that namespaces will add complexity and so it's not advised to use them in simple projects where pipeline grouping is better.

Author: good point, I've updated the copy to highlight the key point you mentioned. Let me know what you think ? @merelcht 

```
**Not to use when**
- In small and simple projects, using namespaces can introduce unnecessary complexity, making pipeline grouping a more suitable choice.
- Namespaces require additional effort, such as updating catalog names, since namespace prefixes are automatically applied to all the elements unless explicitly overridden in the namespaced pipeline parameters.
```

I also included the example on how users can overrides the parameters directly in the pipeline function if they dont want to rename in the catalog

> You will need to update your catalog accordingly. If you don't want to change the names of your inputs, outputs, or parameters with the `namespace_name.` prefix while using a namespace, you should list these objects inside the corresponding parameters of the `pipeline()` creation function. For example:
> 
> ```
> return pipeline(
>     base_pipeline,
>     namespace = "new_namespaced_pipeline", # With that namespace, "new_namespaced_pipeline" prefix will be added to inputs, outputs, params, and node names
>     inputs={"the_original_input_name"}, # Inputs remain the same, without namespace prefix
> )
> ```

Reviewer 2: Yes this looks good now 👍

> - Defining namespace at the node level behaves like tags without ensuring execution consistency, while defining them at the pipeline level helps with modularisation by renaming inputs, outputs, and parameters but can introduce naming conflicts if the pipeline is connected elsewhere or parameters are referenced outside the pipeline.dding namespaces may introduce unnecessary complexity.

Reviewer 2: I'd remove the last sentence. 

```suggestion
- Defining namespace at the node level behaves like tags without ensuring execution consistency, while defining them at the pipeline level helps with modularisation by renaming inputs, outputs, and parameters but can introduce naming conflicts if the pipeline is connected elsewhere or parameters are referenced outside the pipeline.
```
